---
title: SOTS
description: A commercially available, ready-made, security program for public use immediately.
date: 2023-11-01 10:00:00
---

For those who have been involved in cybersecurity and infosec for a while it's rather easy to identify some key aspects that go into a well rounded security program. It's also a complete can of worms. There is vulnerability management, knowledge management, asset management, identity and access management, incident and response management, security incident and event management, security engineering, general security operations, compliance, the list goes on (and I'm sure I'm forgetting something too). Security is also heavily subjective depending on your industry and/or business risk tolerance, so take all of that with a grain of salt.

A great exercise I encourage everyone to try is to come up with your own security stack from scratch. Start from zero as if you are a founding member of a new startup. How do you address the initial risks, what controls do you put in place, how do you handle the aforementioned areas of the business. And remember, your a broke start up so you have to do it on the cheap too. You will learn so much about your security stack of today by doing this. Promise. _I plan on doing a guide on this in the future as well._

One thing I have been desperately trying to wrap my head around is how do we make this knowledge more widely available to people at say a startup? Of course startups have no intention in hiring for security roles, and I don't blame them. Good security people are expensive. Good security also takes time, which startups on tighter than ever runways don't have the luxury of. This is a real problem and something I have spent a fair amount of time considering.

One of the things that most often motivates startups to invest in security is achieving a certification like [SOC 2](https://www.aicpa-cima.com/cpe-learning/publication/soc-2-reporting-on-an-examination-of-controls-at-a-service-organization-relevant-to-security-availability-processing-integrity-confidentiality-or-privacy) or [ISO 27001](https://www.iso.org/standard/27001). The idea is typically either planted in a founders head by an investor, customer, or competitor. This presumption that obtaining a certification has a direct impact on your revenue is not exactly wrong. Some customers see a certification like this as a checkbox in a security questionnaire that must be checked or risk loosing their business. Security orgs have demanded standardization for a long time and these certificates are as close as it gets.

This understanding has led to a huge growth in the prevalence [of](https://sprinto.com/) [automated](https://drata.com/) [compliance](https://www.vanta.com/) [startups](https://secureframe.com/) promising a fast track to compliance and certification. And they are delivering on that promise, with a price tag to justify it. Listen, I'm not here to argue if certifications are practical or not. They aren't. [SOC2 is a weak positive indicator of security maturity, in the same ballpark of significance as a penetration test report](https://fly.io/blog/soc2-the-screenshots-will-continue-until-security-improves/). The key takeaway here is companies with a SOC 2, ISO 27001, or whatever it may be; still get hacked.

My hypothesis is companies that practice radical transparency in their security practices are more effective at preventing incidents than certifications and are more trustworthy. A bold statement maybe, but one I believe in fully. It's a strategy I am exploring with [Wiards](https://wiards.io/) and I hope to have some more details on what this looks like soon. The inspiration behind this space actually comes from a term NIST uses called [COTS](https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/cots), commercial-off-the-shelf product. NIST doesn't refer to a specific type of product other than something that, "exists" and is available from commercial sources available to the general public. The whole idea is based on this philosophy of something you can get off the shelf and it just works. How close can security get to this? The big bet is we can get closer to, "secure" than any off-the-shelf certification that exists today. Security-off-the-shelf.

What does radical transparency look like? I'm still work-shopping this. There needs to be some burden of proof that as a business you are operating securely, and that your service/product is also meeting your security goals. Tracking these proofs and goals create good signals and bad signals. Signals can be measured objectively. And these measures can be visualized in a way to establish trust with your market in an honest and transparent way that hasn't been done before. How do we measure and what do we measure are still big unknowns to me, but I have some ideas. Grading is hard, and dashboards can be manipulated.

Ultimately I think the R&D is worth the payoff if we can get to a point where security is done more in the open and not in a black box. A security-off-the-shelf solution can get us there and the question I'm left with is, does the industry want it?
